---
title: "About"
toc: false
---

## Who is the RDM Toolkit for?
The Research Data Management Toolkit (*RDM Toolkit*) has been designed to guide life scientists in their efforts to better manage their research data. It is articulated around the various steps of the data lifecycle, although not all the steps will be relevant to everyone! A key feature of the Toolkit is that it can be navigated via ‘role’, ‘domain’, ‘examples’ and ‘problems’, the contents of which was generated by the broader ELIXIR community coming together as part of the [ELIXIR-CONVERGE](https://elixir-europe.org/about-us/how-funded/eu-projects/converge) project.

## What does the RDM Toolkit aim to achieve?
At the heart of FAIR science lies good data management practice, so that research outputs are findable, accessible, interoperable and reusable. This is increasingly important as life science research becomes data-intensive and traditional ‘wet labs’ make space for ‘dry (computer) labs’. More than ever, scientists need relevant tools and guidance to better manage their data and hence contribute to making FAIR science a reality. This translates to better productivity for all concerned, and at all steps of the data lifecycle.. Remember that [the cost of not having FAIR research data has been estimated at €10.2bn annually in Europe](https://op.europa.eu/en/publication-detail/-/publication/d375368c-1a0a-11e9-8d04-01aa75ed71a1/language-en), hence by using the Toolkit and better managing your data, you will be contributing to strengthening the European economy. 

- **For researchers** -  The Toolkit is a one stop shop of information, advice and signposting to research data management know-how, tools, examples and best practice. Struggling with writing your funder-requested data management plan? The Toolkit can help!

- **For data managers in laboratories, facilities or universities** - The Toolkit is a resource for your researchers, a complement to your own resources and a guide to the specific challenges of RDM for life science researchers.

## How to cite the RDM Toolkit
ELIXIR (2020) Research Data Management Toolkit. A deliverable from the EU-funded ELIXIR-CONVERGE project (grant agreement 871075). URL: https://rdm.elixir-europe.org

The ELIXIR Data Management toolkit makes all of their materials publicly available under [Open Source Initiative](https://opensource.org/licenses) licenses.
The process documents and data are made available under a [CC-BY](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/) license.
Software are made available under an [MIT license](https://opensource.org/licenses/mit-license.html).
For full details on licensing, please visit https://github.com/elixir-europe/rdm-toolkit/blob/master/LICENSE

## Acknowledgements
The Toolkit was developed with funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 Research and Innovation programme under grant agreement No 871075, as part of the ELIXIR-CONVERGE project. We are grateful to all who contributed their time to producing contents for the Toolkit. 
